---
layout: post
svg: test.svg
title:  Introduction
categories: texts
dek: I need a description of this.
---

For a long time, the role of a graphic designer was rather easy to define. It meant working with your hands to find the right visual form for a piece of content, and delivery of a final, static design e.g. in the form of a poster, business card or letterhead. Amazingly clever and beautiful art has been created this way.

However, we find ourselves at an interesting time in the design world, not because this definition of design has changed much, but because the products we're required to build have changed. Looking at the media landscape of today, it's hard to find a design product that hasn't changed because of the digital revolution. Designing layouts for a smartphone app means taking into account a complex set of states, where each screen can have tens or hundreds of possible transitions. Designing the scenery of most computer games requires the designer to use procedural techniques, as it's simply impossible to design every detail by hand. Even logos are becoming dynamic, with designers building dynamic identities fit for representing many faces of the same entity. Common to all of these examples is that none of them can be built using traditional design tools, and all of them require the use of a programming language.

This book is the result of a simple question: What happens when we try to redefine the graphic design curriculum using a programming language as the tool for the designer? For some readers, this will be a provocative question. The field of graphic design is rooted in the fine arts, and students still go through curricula based on traditions taught by painting, sculpture, and architecture. This is of course a great positive, and this book builds upon that very foundation. However, when this tradition is used to wrongly turn designers into luddites (Paul Rand famously said *It’s important to use your hands. This is what distinguishes you from a cow or a computer operator* [^1]), designers are institutionalized to think of themselves as direct opposites to technical people: ideators, who come up with concepts for others to execute. This contradicts a century-long bond between design and advances in technology in which the designer is a craftsman, and it simply threatens to make the traditional designer irrelevant.

For others, this question will make perfect sense. The fine arts, and graphic design in particular, is a skill you learn to master through very specific rules. The history of graphic design is full of artists who thought of design as a system, even way before the computer. It's important for designers to learn how to code (or programmers to acquire design skills), simply because history shows that systems can be expressive, creative, and challenge many of the notions inherited from traditional design labor. Furthermore, today these theories can be more than theoretical instructions for a manual workflow. We have the ability to write algorithmic systems that create designs, and the designer of the future will need to understand how to deliver on that promise.

As you go through the text, you will notice that it starts with the very basics. The code will be simple, and the exercises will be full of constraints. If this feels easy, keep reading. We will soon enough touch upon more challenging themes. My insistence on starting with the very basics comes from the philosophy that these simple relationships are also the most important ones, and they lay the foundation for some of the more complex ideas.

This book is written for readers with an introductory knowledge of programming in JavaScript, which means that little time will be devoted to explaining concepts like variables, functions, etc. For this audience, I highly recommend Daniel Shiffman's book "XXXXXX"[^2], where Dan does a much better job at explaining these concepts than I could ever do. The material within this book is in no way complete, and it will certainly change as our tools evolve. Although the examples are created using [P5.js](http://p5js.org), I have tried to write the text to be as general as possible, and all concepts should easily be portable to whatever graphics programming languate you prefer.

I'm not the first author to write about systems in graphic design, and this book builds upon ideas from many incredible authors, who are too numerous to mention. Even within the last ten years, lots have been written about the computer's impact on graphic design. A majority of this literature, however, consists of portfolio books showcasing the end products, within a discussion of how to evaluate whether these algorithmic design products are successful or not. At worst, this comes with a blind fascination of code-based designs, written by people who are not programmers. Because of this, I discourage my students to read books on generative design, which too often involves splattering a canvas with algorithmic drawing. That is not what this book is about. I am interested in introducing systems-thinking to the proven art of graphic design, not to replace the foundations of design with the unnecessarily complex.

This is a book that teaches you how to make designs in code, and how to evaluate the success of algorithmic design products. The book is written for both programmers wanting to learn the fundamentals of design, as well as designers wanting to take advantage of algorithms in their design process. It is my hope that this book will serve as an inspiration for new types of design projects, and help break down the barriers between two powerful sciences: Graphic design and computer science.

[^1]: NEEDS REF
[^2]: NEEDS REF
